---
layout: post
title:  "Pragmatism and Daoism Rough Draft"
date:   2017-09-30 10:01:48
categories: Comparative Philosophy
---

Status: Incoherent 
To be clarified:
Meaningness - how to hold a clearheaded “meta-systematic” perspective and avoid falling into absolutist or totally relativistic thinking.

Eventually, one notices that meanings continue to operate quite well despite their lack of ultimate foundations. Systems re-emerge as transparent forms. You no longer see by means of systems, but can see through systems as contingent constructions that most people mis-take as solid…[systems and meanings] are both nebulous (intangible, interpenetrating, transient, amorphous, and ambiguous) and patterned (reliable, distinct, enduring clear, and definite).”


A Pragmatist Reading of Daoism 
This paper will argue that the philosophical tradition of Pragmatism can be used to better understand classical Daoism, since pragmatists like William James and John Dewey employ a similar method to Zhuangzi and Laozi in challenging dominant modes of thought. Read together, a comparative study can give us a broader conceptual framework to draw from in clarifying  Daoist ideas. The first section of the paper will begin with an exploration of the different metaphysical perspectives outlined in the Laozi and Zhuangzi and their respective differences. Afterwards, the section will try and draw some structural parallels to the Pragmatist and the way they responded to traditional metaphysical perspectives. The second section will then try to draw a comparison between the mode of being and knowing outlined by Zhuangzi and the Pragmatists.  Both the Pragmatists and the Daoists place their solution of right action within a broader critique of substantial metaphysics.

In the Daodejing, Laozi paints a perspective of the myriad things in the world as existing in an “eternal Dao,” one which lies at the root source or base of everything. Red Pine’s translation of the Dao De Jing writes: “The Tao gives birth to one/ one gives birth to two/ two gives birth to three/ three gives birth to ten thousand things/ ten thousand things with yin at their backs/ and yang in their embrace” (Dao De Jing 42). For Laozi, the Dao is ultimate reality, producing wan wu or the ten thousand things in the phenomenal world. The manifold things comes into existence from the Dao and ceases into the Dao. Ho-Shang Kung elaborates on this cosmology, saying: “The Tao gives birth to the beginning. One gives birth to yin and yang. Yin and yang give birth to the breath...breath divide themselves into Heaven, Earth, and Man and together give birth to the ten thousand things” (Red Pine 84). In other words, the Dao--existing as ultimate non being, produces being, which gives rise to the ten thousand things. 

Paradoxically, Laozi undermines himself in the very beginning of the Dao De Jing when he says, “the name that becomes the name, is not the Immortal Name” (Dao De Jing 1). However one tries to go about defining the Dao will end up with an incomplete version, since all metaphysical claims about the Dao are inherently restricted by the constructions of human language and knowledge. Anything offered as an explanation becomes a manifestation of the Dao and is not the Dao itself; by trying to express the ineffable, Laozi renders nothing into something: an ontological Being. As such, Fu has argued that Laozi’s communication of the Dao has turned nonbeing into a metaphysical reality, treating it as prior to the world, one where the world emerges out of it, such that it is treated as more real or valuable than the actual world to which it gives birth (Fu 1976).

In his work, The World as Pure Experience, William James outlines a similar structure of reality, labelling the primary as “pure experience” and what comes afterwards as secondary conceptualization and discrimination. James writes, “pure experience is the name I give to the immediate flux of life which furnishes the material to our later reflection with its conceptual categories” (James 93). Like the ultimate Dao, the primacy of “pure experience” is a potentiality of that “which is not yet any definite what, though ready to be all sorts of whats” (James 93). However, by speaking of the Dao as the foundation and cosmological origin of all things, Laozi turned potentiality, the state of non-being, into a metaphysical reality. Conversely, James avoids any metaphysical claims, instead focusing on the world as experienced. He writes: “Although for fluency’s sake I myself spoke earlier in this article of a stuff of pure experience, I have now to say that there is no general stuff of which experience at large is made, there are as many stuffs as there are ‘natures’ in the thing experienced. If you ask what anyone bit of pure experience is made of, the answer is always the same. ‘It is made of that, of just what appears, of space, of intensity, of flatness, brownness, heaviness or what not.’ Experience is only a collective name for all these sensible natures, and save for time and space (and if you like for ‘being’) there appears no universal element of which all things are made” (James 26). As such, James’ conflation of being with the changes of what is experienced is more similar to Zhuangzi’s affirmation of the Dao as the unfolding of the ten thousand things and the flow of becoming.

Similarly, Roger Ames and David Hall dismiss the idea of a metaphysical dao behind the world, writing: “The Daoist does not posit the existence of some permanent reality behind appearances, some unchanging substratum, some essential defining aspect behind the accidents of change. Rather, there is just the ceaseless and usually cadenced flow of experience” (Laozi 14). In contrast to a static dao, they conceive of the dao in verb tense, something like the terms “building, learning, and work,” which entails both the “process and the creative product” (Laozi 17). According to this understanding, the dao is dynamic and not static--it is changing all the time and moving through time. 

Zhuangzi’s writings on the Dao can be considered a creative development of Laozi’s Dao--one that is based on taking an anti-metaphysical stance towards the Dao. He expresses his skepticism of needing to define the Dao like Laozi, writing: ‘“Ziyou said, “So the piping of the earth means just the sound of these hollows. And the piping of man would be the sound of bamboo panpipes. What, then, is the piping of Heaven?” Ziqi said, “It gusts through all the ten thousand differences, allowing each to go its own way. But since each one selects out its own, what identity can (2:5) there be for their rouser?”’ (Ziporyn 28). By using the parable sounds of the bamboo panpipes, Zhuangzi evokes and addresses the dilemma of what the source of all transformations is. Laozi would ostensibly answer the question of Ziyou by saying that all the different sounds are a manifestation of the ultimate Dao. Conversely, Zhuangzi would claim that such a question is flawed in the first place since “all assertions about the origin of a perspective are internal to that perspective, there is no perspective-independent way of verifying their reliability, or of adjudicating between conflicting accounts” (Ziporyn 4). As such, using Ziyou as a mouthpiece, Zhuangzi argues that we are not able to determine what or who or when in origination, except for the transformation of things. Moreover, our opinions of the Dao would “neither add to nor subtract from that genuineness” to the natural world and its course of becoming. 

John Dewey shares a similar critique of a metaphysics that generalizes objects and turns them into essences. In his work, Experience and Nature, Dewey labels this critique the “philosophical fallacy”. This fallacy “consists in the supposition that whatever is found true under certain conditions may forthwith be asserted universally or without limits and conditions” (Dewey 105). In other words, philosophers make universal truth claims or generalizations from specific cases, transforming specific events into an eternal objet. Dewey argues an eternal object is useless because it “would have no applicability, no potentiality of use as measure and control of other events” (Dewey 64). The abstract form of an Eternal object would prevent one from being able to deal practically with events in our lived experience. While Dewey’s critique is in response to the western metaphysical tradition that treats mind or consciousness as existing prior to events, the structure of such a critique is in line with Zhuangzi’s stance against the reification of a substantive cause that lies behind the primacy of experience. For Dewey, no such substantial basis exists for one’s experience is always contextual and relational. Similarly for Zhuangzi, one can never know what or who makes things what they are, as things become what they are by virtue of their correlation, interaction, and interdependence with each other, as all joints, openings, and organs of one’s body. Both philosophies uphold process and change as the fundamental driver of the world. Such an understanding is also ineffable, since no statement about a thing can substitute for the experience of the thing, and every description leaves out more than it includes. 

Together, Zhuangzi and the pragmatists, James and Dewey, destroy the basis for any metaphysical basis, in turn, undermining the ground upon which previous final truth, absolute knowledge, and positivistic claims are made. It would seem that a lack of a metaphysical basis to ground or justify any particular way of being would give rise to a relativistic form of ethical conduct where there are no rights or wrongs. However, Zhuangzi embraces such a void, writing: “We give, we receive, we act, we construct: all day long we apply our minds to struggles against one thing or another...Shooting forth like an arrow from a bowstring: such is our presumption when we arbitrate right and wrong...The mind is left on the verge of death, and nothing can restore its vitality” (Ziporyn 27-28). Zhuangzi criticizes the urge to reason and make value claims from one’s limited perspective, stating how such efforts have been futile and harmful. Furthermore, the act of trying to make a value claim lays pretense to absolute knowledge, and undermines itself by “regard[ing] the nonexistent as existent,” for “the existence of the nonexistent is beyond the understanding of even the divine sage-king Yu—so what possible sense could it make to someone like me?” (Ziporyn 29). Because trying to make an absolute value claim from one’s limited perspective is impossible, Zhuangzi avoids continuing “along the same ruts” and embraces a perspectivism that breaks free from such a limitation and equalizes all opinions. 
Zhuangzi’s perspectivism opens up an individual to different perspectives and a state of effortless action, or wuwei, that could be potentially transformative, bringing them closer to the Dao. Such a position introduces the individual to the possibility of transcending the limitations of their perspective, which he describes as “chariot[ing] upon what is true both to Heaven and to earth, riding atop the back-and-forth of the six atmospheric breaths, so that your wandering could nowhere be brought to a halt” (Ziporn 5). Zhuangzi elaborates on this position, writing: “In this way, wholeheartedly embody the endlessness and roam where there is no sign, fully realize whatever is received from Heaven, but without thinking anything has been gained thereby. (7:13) It is just being empty, nothing more. The Consummate Person uses his mind like a mirror, rejecting nothing, welcoming nothing: responding but not storing. Thus he can handle all things (7:14) without harm” (Ziporyn 75). The previous two passages suggest that one can gain genuine freedom from one’s perspective and the limitations it entails--that of limited knowledge and individual prejudices--through what Ziporyn describes as a complete embrace and dependence on the plurality of perspectives (Ziporn 2014). Thus, “the Radiance of Drift and Doubt is the sage’s only map. He makes no definition of what is right but instead entrusts it to the everyday function of each thing. This is what I call the Illumination of the Obvious (2:29)” (Ziporyn 31). The sage is able to transcend their own identity and its limitations by opening up their identity to all situations, and allowing the determinants of the situation to transform their perspective accordingly. 

Philosophies focus, James and Dewey argue, should center on the relationship between experience, action, and truth. James articulates this method in his Pragmatic Theory of Truth, which contains a set of instruments that measures the value of certain practical actions in terms of their “cash value” and ability to bring about a particular set of circumstances. Restated simply, “truth is the expedient in the way of thinking” (James). Like Zhuangzi, James criticizes dogmatists who cling onto their limited perspective, writing: “dogmatism will doubtless continue to condemn us for this confession. The mere outward form of inalterable certainty is so precious to some minds...but the safe thing is surely to recognise that all the insights of creatures of a day like ourselves must be provisional. The wisest of critics is an altering being, subject to the better insight of the morrow, and right at any moment, only ‘up to date’ and ‘on the whole’. When larger ranges of truth open, it is surely best to be able to open ourselves to their reception” (James 326). Dewey elaborates on this position, arguing that truths in philosophy should be based on their ability to encourage ‘‘concrete human experience and its potentialities...to clarify, to liberate, and to extend the goods of our lives and practices” (Dewey 305). Furthermore, such a belief situates the individual within a community, and is productive if it brings them into proper harmony. Both Zhuangzi and the pragmatists employ a similar pragmatic regard for truth, as a means of guiding behavior. One that treats truth not in terms of abstract theory but rather as tools to help guide effective action. As such, both employ a method of knowing that is not based on a fixed or abstract system, one hypostatized into an eternal good, but rather is based on a system that is flexible and maintains a pragmatism towards the applicable of provisional categories.

Without an abstract, static foundation from which things proceed from, Zhuangzi and the pragmatists develop an idea of right action as one that is established based on a present “suchness,” one that measures its usefulness based on an openness to the situation. For Zhuangzi, this idea of effortless action and naturalness is embodied in the zhenren or authentic person, who is able to transcend the limitations that come from embracing a plurality of perspectives. Similarly for the pragmatists, the situation at hand has primacy in determining how one should respond accordingly. Both philosophies provide an alternative method of being in and interacting with the world that is free of presuppositions and claims to objective types of knowledge.  

Works Cited
Burik, Steven. “Comparative Resources: Continental Philosophy and Daoism.” Journal of Daoist Studies, vol. 9, no. 1, 2016, pp. 18–48., doi:10.1353/dao.2016.0001.
Dewey, John. Experience and Nature. Open Court, 1965.
Dewey, John. Human Nature and Conduct: an Introduction to Social Psychology. Emereo Publishing, 2013.
Fu, Charles Wei-Hsun. “Creative Hermeneutics: Taoist Metaphysics And Heidegger.” Journal of Chinese Philosophy, vol. 3, no. 2, 1976, pp. 115–143., doi:10.1111/j.1540-6253.1976.tb00384.x.
Hall, David L., and Roger T. Ames. Thinking from the Han: Self, Truth, and Transcendence in Chinese and Western Culture. State Univ. of New York Press, 1998.
Hansen, Chad. A Daoist Theory of Chinese Thought: a Philosophical Interpretation. Oxford Univ. Press, 2009.
James, William. Essays in Radical Empiricism: a Pluralistic Universe. UMI, 1998.
James, William. Pragmatism: and Four Essays from the Meaning of Truth. New American Library, 1974.
James, William. The Varieties of Religious Experience: a Study in Human Nature, Being the Gifford Lectures on Natural Religion Delivered at Edinburgh in 1901-1902, by William James. The Modern Library (Parkway Printing Co.).
Lao-tzu, et al. Daodejing: "Making This Life Significant: a Philosophical Translation. Ballantine Books, 2004.
Laozi, and Bill Porter. Lao-Tzu's Taoteching: with Selected Commentaries from the Past 2,000 Years. Copper Canyon Press, 2009.
Meacham, Bill. “Contents.” Tao Te Ching Ontology, 2010, www.bmeacham.com/whatswhat/TaoTeChingOntology.html#4.Process Metaphysics|outline.
Stuhr, John J. 100 Years of Pragmatism: William James's Revolutionary Philosophy. Indiana University Press, 2010.
Ziporyn, Brook Anthony, and Zhuangzi -. Zhuangzi: the Essential Writings with Selections from Traditional Commentaries. Hackett Pub. Co., 2009.
Ziporyn, Brook. “ Zhuangzi: The Essential Writings Supplemental Material.” Hackett Publishing , 2014, www.hackettpublishing.com/zhuangzisup.


